# Beholding the Jewel of Reality
# Auspicious Beginning
> So long as there are occurrences of spaces/hopes, Kamalapāṇi reigns supreme—he whose nature incomparable bliss, who is an abode of riches, who is without any abode; whose consorts are the incomparable ten goddesses, who is with his consort, who brings about the attainment of welfare and happiness for the three worlds, and who is without degeneration.

Concerning the verse beginning '... incomparable', the syntax (*sambandha*) is as follows: 'Kamalapāṇi', [a *vyadhikaraṇabahuvrīhi*] meaning he who has a lotus (*kamala* = *padma*) in hand, i.e. the blessed Avalokiteśvara, reigns supreme (√*ji*). How is he characterised? He is called one whose nature (*rūpa* = *svabhāva*) is none other than bliss that is 'incomparable' (*anupama*), i.e. it is without a point of comparison (*upamārahita*) since there is nothing else that has the qualities of supreme excellence (*atipraṇīta*), greatness (*mahattva*), and steadiness (*sthāyitva*) so long as *saṃsāra* remains. How else is he characterised? 'Riches' (*śrī*) are the requisites/accumulations (*sambhāra*) of merit and knowledge, and he is called an abode (*nivāsa*) or locus (*āśraya*) for those. He is 'without any abode' (*anivāsa*) because, in pervading all in the form of the Dharmakāya, he lacks any fixed (*pratiniyata*) abode.

How else is he? He is called one who has as his attendants (*paricāraka*) 'consorts' (*vidyā*) in the form of the 'ten goddesses' (*devī*) beginning with Rūpavajrā and ending with Tārā. They are 'incomparable' (*nirupama*), i.e. they surpass all points of comparison (*upamātikrānta*), in that they have [the qualities] beginning with supreme beauty (*rūpa*) and youth (*yauvana*), the *rasa*s of amorousness (*śṛṅgāra*) and so forth, and great compassion (*mahākaruṇā*). He is present with his [own personal] consort (*vidyā*) who resembles him (*svābhā*), and thus he is said to be 'accompanied by his consort' (*savidya*). He is called ['one who brings about the attainment of welfare and happiness for the three worlds' (*tribhuvanahitasaukhyaprāptikāra*)]: he is one of whom there is the doing of (*kāra* = *karaṇa*) the attainment (*prāpti*) or direct experience (*sākṣātkriyā*) of welfare (*hita*), i.e. the future benefit of being a buddha and the like, [and] happiness (*saukhya*), i.e. the temporarily benefit of being a universal monarch and the like, for the three worlds (*tribhuvana*), i.e. for the beings (*jana*) who reside (*vartin*) in the three worlds. He is 'without degeneration' (*avikāra*) because he lacks degeneration (*vikāra*) or change (*anyathātva*) insofar as, by lacking the quality that is complete *nirvāṇa*, his nature is that of non-abiding *nirvāṇa*. The Blessed One who is thus characterised reigns supreme.


What else is he like? He has the consorts (vidyā) as his retinue, who take the form of the ten goddesses beginning with Rūpavajrā and up to Tārā, who are unequalled, i.e. incomparable, in that they transcend all comparison insofar as they have great beauty, youth, the rasa of eroticism and so on, and great compassion and so on. He has his consort insofar as he has his personal consort (svābhārūpa). He is one who produces (kāra = karaṇa) the attainment, i.e. the manifestation, of the happiness, i.e. the immediate benefit (āpātapathya), of the state of being a cakravartin king and so on. Its benefit, i.e. its future benefit (āyatipathya), is buddhahood and so on for the three worlds, i.e. for beings who traverse the three worlds. He is immutable because, by becoming one whose nature is non-abiding nirvāṇa in insofar as he lacks the quality of final nirvāṇa (aparinirvāṇa), he lacks any change, i.e. a difference. The Blessed One so characterized reigns supreme.

For how long? Addressing this, he says 'so long as there are occurrences of spaces/hopes'. Spaces (*āśā*) are the ten directions, their nature being the sky. Alternatively, hopes (*āśā*) are the longings (*tṛṣṇā*) of all beings for the enjoyments of the world (*bhavabhoga*). Their 'occurrences' (*vikāśa*) are their opportunities (*avakāśa*) or functionings (*pravarta*) [respectively], which is as much as to say their comings into existence (*prādurbhāva*). So long as there are these [openings], the Blessed One reigns supreme, which is to say that he is superior to all [gods] such as Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Brahmā.

Here, by saying that he is one 'whose nature is incomparable bliss', the perfection of [Avalokiteśvara's] personal aims (*svārthasaṃpatti*) is expressed. By saying that he is 'an abode of riches', the means to that [perfection is expressed], because the word 'riches' (*śrī*) refers to the requisites of merit and wisdom (*puṇyajñānasambhāra*). By saying that he is one 'who brings about the attainment welfare and happiness for the three worlds', the perfection of the aims of others (*parārthasaṃpatti*) is taught. By saying that he is one 'whose consorts are the incomparable ten goddesses' and 'who is with by his consort', the means to that [perfection is taught], because one is unable to bring about the perfection of the aims of others in every way (*sarvākāraparārthasaṃpatti*) without the forms (*ākāra*) of those kind of goddesses (*tathābhūtadevī*) and a body endowed with the thirty-two major signs and eighty minor marks.

# 2: The purpose of the treatise, etc.
> Employing seven divisions thronging with the teachings of various [teachers], I undertake the present effort to bring about clear understanding for those who indeed do not know the nature, devoid of [expression through] clear words, of the glorious Way of Mantra's beautiful fourth initiation.

The words 'glorious Way of Mantra' (*śrīmantranīti*), although they can express the *yogatantra*s in general, [here] refer to the glorious *[Guhya]samāja*, since the meaning/content (*artha*) of the fourth [initiation] does not appear elsewhere. The rest [of the first half of the verse] one can easily understand. \[I undertake the present effort] by employing seven divisions (*bheda* = *prakāra*) thronging with (muddled with?) (*saṃkula* = *vyākula*) many (*gaṇa*) teachings (*upadeśa*) of various teachers (*nānācārya*)—i.e., they compile (*saṃgrāhaka*) a number of teachings (*upadeśarāśi*) known/belonging (*gata*) to teachers of the past, present, and future. \[I do so] `to bring about clear understanding', i.e. for the sake of easily (*sukhena*) comprehending clearly (*sphuṭapratīti*).

# The reality and goal according to non-Buddhists
> All (*nikhila*) non-Buddhist philosophers (*tīrthya*) indeed (*hi*) have completely mistaken (*sambhrānta*) ideas (*bodha*) regarding the realisation of the nature (*rūpavitti*) of reality and the goal. People say that that the best among them are the Vedāntins, supposedly (*kila*) knowers of reality (*tattvavetṝ*).

'Completely mistaken' and so forth: Non-Buddhist philosophers (*tīrthika*) are [here] called those whose 'ideas' (*bodha*), i.e. particular forms of insight (*prajñā*), are 'completely mistaken' (*sambhrānta* = *vibhrānta*).
Absolutely all of the non-Buddhist philosophers (*tīrthya*) have their intellectual eyes (*buddhinayana*) injured (*upahata*) by the eye diesease (*timira*) of grasping to the self (*ātman*) and its supposed belongings (*ātmīya*).
Thinking 'This is reality' and 'This is the goal', they are confused (*bhrānta*) regarding the 'realisation' (*vitti* = *pratīti*) of the nature (*svarūpa*) of reality and the goal.
The remainder is easy to understand.

\[Objection:] But insofar as reality and the goal are both to be adopted (*upādeya*), reality and the goal have the same nature.
So how are they taught (*nirdeśa*) separately (*bhedena*)?
This is not true.
For, even though it is to be adopted, reality pervades of the entirety (saṃdoha) of all appearances, be they pleasant, painful, neutral, or otherwise.
And the goal, is the fruit, characterised by one's wish, by casting off what is not desired. 
Even though it is to be adopted, it is surely by means of exclusion of what is not the goal that it is desired as to be accomplished by all sentient beings.
Thus there is no fault.

Verse 15:

Some say that the fourth initiation is the tasting of bodhicitta subsequent to the teaching of the wisdom-knowledge [initiation]. This is inferior. Why? Because all effort in visualisations would be futile, because their result is obtained [at that time].

Commentary:
'Wisdom-knowledge' etc. Some say that after the teaching of the wisdom-knowledge (prajñājñāna) initiation, the taking (grahaṇa) of bodhicitta in the form of nectar with one's tongue (rasanā) constitutes the fourth (turya = caturtha) initiation. And that is 'inferior' (avara) or deficient, which is to say vile (hīna). Why is it inferior? Because all effort (prayāsa), i.e. that practices taught by the tathāgatas, carried out in the meditations on mantras, mudrās, and the forms of deities, etc., becomes futile. Why? Because the result - the fruit to be accomplished through visualization - is already established/attained at the time of tasting bodhicitta, meaning there is no other superior result to be achieved."
